# Critical Mass Intern Application

## Work / Project Examples
### 1. Rakuten Internship
In June of 2018 to May 2019, I did an 11-month internship in Tokyo at tech company called Rakuten Inc. I was put in a new team that was building a business analytics and management dashboard for clients of the company. My role mainly consisted of frontend development but also included unit testing, API documentation, UI/UX design, and research. Our tech stack was a React frontend and a Node.js backend with a MySQL database. I quickly learned React & Redux and started developing features in the first week.

By the end of the internship, I contributed the development of numerous features of the project. For example, one of the many features I developed was a page for clients to invite their new employees to access the dashboard. The page allowed the user to upload a CSV file, where each row in the CSV would have the name and email of the employee they are inviting. The contents of the CSV was dynamically displayed on a table on the page after upload. The frontend would then call an API to invite each employee in the CSV. Furthermore, if there were failed invitations, they would be displayed on a new table, which would allow the user to download a new CSV with only the erroneous rows allowing the user to edit/fix them. After developing these features with styling, I did extensive unit testing on it with Jest and Enzyme. One of the challenges I faced during the testing was having to mock the API call and response. This was solved by using a new library to mock AJAX calls.

I also contributed to the backend mainly in the form of documentation. I communicated with the tech lead and backend developers to help myself understand the purpose of all the APIs in the backend, then I wrote detailed documentation of the APIs using Swagger (OpenAPI). By the end of the internship, we integrated a framework in the backend called NestJS. I was given the task of using NestJS' swagger documentation feature, which automatically generates Swagger documentation through inline annotations in the source code. I worked with another intern and successfully annotated all the APIs, which automated the process of API documentation, as it would generate it upon building the backend.

### 2. Online Grocery Store Web Application
In my databases course, I made an online grocery store web application within a team of 3 as our final project. In the beginning phases, I designed the database of the application by creating an entity-relation diagram. This diagram was improved in iterations as we would review the diagram and remove redundancies and add new fields. After defining the schema, I worked with my teamates to write dozens of MySQL queries which would be needed in the features/requirements we defined. For example, one of our features was to place all items on a premade user grocery list to the shopping cart for checkout, this required us to write a query which took all of the items associated to a certain grocery list and insert it to the table for the shopping cart.

The application itself was done with a PHP frontend which would make queries to a MySQL database to retrieve the data. I mapped our database design to MySQL tables with the use of XAMPP. I also developed most of the pages with HTML/CSS and Javascript to make a simple, responsive frontend while using PHP to connect to our database and make queries to fetch data. The MySQL queries which I mentioned previously were all utilized in the PHP code and fetched the appropriate data.

Part of the code base can be viewed [here](https://github.com/garlandkhuu/CPSC471GroceryProject).

### 3. Code The Change Mini-Hackathon - Grocery List App
I did a mini 8 hour hackathon which was hosted by Code the Change Foundataion YYC. The theme of the hackathon was climate change. My group decided to create a grocery list application which would take items on the list, evaluate how "green" it is, and give reccomendations for more eco-friendly alternatives. Due to the lack of time, we decided to only do a prototype of the application with React and NodeJS. I took the role of the tech lead since a big majority of my team was less experienced in the technical aspects and had little software development experience. I was able to design a database schema of our applciation, and presented it to the team. I also contributed to the UI design and drew a wireframe for the application.

The development of the project was done with React in the frontend and NodeJS as the backend with a MongoDB database. We also tried the Serverless framework as well as AWS to deploy our project. Unfortunately, due to inexperience with setting up the backend and AWS, we were unable to succesfully complete the backend. This was a big learning experience for me as it taught me that I should not underestimate environment setup especially if I'm unfamiliar with the technologies I use. I also learned a lot about MongoDB and how a NoSQL database differs from a SQL database. I then moved to developing the frontend and created a prototype of the application using Material UI for the styles and components. Our team won the Best Idea award due to the design of the application and its realistic way of tackling a modern problem through the product design.

## Inspirations
### Elm
[Elm](https://elm-lang.org/) is a purely functional programming language for frontend web development.

In the programming paradigms course I took, I was introduced to functional programming in the form of Haskell, which is a language that usually only stays in an academic environment, and rarely found its way into the tech industry. I was captivated by Haskell and functional programming as a whole due to its elegance. It showed me a new way to think about programming. It taught me how you can think of everything as a function and gave me a deeper appreciation of types.

Elm is a language which is built on top of Haskell and takes all the advantages of the functional paradigm, and makes it applicable to the industry in the the world of web development. Elm is transpiled to working javascript code and is able to run on the browser. It has a passionate community which welcomes beginners with open arms, and it has well written documentation. A big advantage of Elm is the complete eradication of run-time errors. Due to the nature of functional programming and its rigid typing, each function will always return an output. This means the the majority of errors the user will face are semantic errors. Because of the immutability of the values in Elm, it has great performance on the DOM. The Elm project inspire me as the creators took the elegance of the functional paradigm and made it a useful language.

### Google Docs
One of my favourite applications is Google Docs, the collaborative text/document editor by Google. The application is extremely convenient for a student as your document is stored on the cloud and can be edited on any device. From a technical standpoint, while I was researching different solutions for implementing real-time updates between two clients in an application I was curious on how Google Docs does it. I was surprised to find that they weren't using Websockets. It seems like Google Docs takes advantage of the fact that the browser can read a request before it is finished. The server appends new data to the request as the document is being edited, which is a clever way to simulate real-time without sockets. This was inspiring as it highlights that being creative and understanding how the technology works can lead to new innovative solutions.

## Focus
If I was given time to build/learn anything during my internship, I would like to focus a lot on backend development and DevOps. Even though I am experienced in the frontend, I would like to gain the knowledge of the full stack and be able to grasp the entirety of a product and how it is deployed. I would also like to delve into functional design and UI/UX design. I am a very visually stimulated person, so I like nice visuals and user friendly design. I would like to learn how to go through the process of making a product which is not just advanced in technology, but is attractive and usable.
